welcome to topcast
episode one of a another new series at
the moment i'm
juggling essentially three series
concluding
the beginning of infinity chapter
explorations
i have just commenced and just recorded
the first
episode of the science of canon cat
the popular science book in addition to
being a popular science book it's a
groundbreaking revolutionary exploration
of
constructor theory a new physics theory
by
kiara maletto who's the author of the
book and david deutsch who is the
originator of
the theory and now i'm beginning
for the first time an exploration of
david deutsch's
first book the fabric of reality the
book that
introduced me to the work of david
deutsch and really changed my
mindset in ways more fundamental than
i think anything else that came before
and it may seem odd
that i'm doing two books in parallel but
my reason for that is twofold i can't
wait for either of them
i wanted to both now that i'm i'm
finishing up with the beginning of
infinity
i've been in my mind i've prepared
myself for doing the fabric of reality
and the fact that kiara has just
released this book
it really means that i can kind of
bookend
the beginning of infinity with its
predecessor
which is the fabric of reality and in
some sense
some sense it's intellectual successor
certainly a descendant of a kind which
is the science of canon can't by kiara
but but this one is about the fabric of
reality so let me get into the fabric of
reality let me first explain
why the fabric of reality is so exciting
and i've said this many times before in
many different places and different
forums
but the basic thing is that
i have a number of popular science books
here on the bookshelf behind me
dominant among the authors there is paul
davies
and paul davies wrote some wonderful
books that were summaries of our best
understanding of science at any
particular given point in time
and he would connect these unlike many
other authors he would connect these to
the history of ideas and to philosophy
and to other areas of our intellectual
endeavors
things like religion theology
mathematics chemistry he would explain
how physics is
tied into these different areas but what
i would say about that is it provided a
wonderful overview an exciting overview
of some of the latest um parts of
science
especially in physics some of the
mysteries some of the open questions as
well
but it is the kind of they were the kind
of books
broadly speaking that
anyone who read them um any anyone
knowledgeable in those areas would
probably think is uncontroversial
this is different to david deutsch's
work
david deutsch's fabric of reality is not
merely a summary of
extent knowledge you know the stuff that
everyone agrees on it is taking
the best theories and explaining them
number one how they are in a sense a
coherent whole hence the fabric
of reality and how there is a
particular way that one should
understand these things in realistic
terms
and so the fabric of reality is about
the four strands so they're talked about
the four strands the fabric of reality
and david takes a a scalpel a scalpel
too
trying to remove errors from
our understanding of these different
theories in order to clarify exactly
what our best understanding is
as hard as it may be sometimes to accept
and you know in particular you know the
the theory of quantum
physics is explained here
in a popular account for the first time
as far as i'm aware
first time in a popular account we
explain the realistic conception of
quantum theory
prior to this you know as i was
struggled through university trying to
understand quantum theory
i was told the usual nonsense about if
you think you understand quantum theory
then you don't okay this is what richard
feynman said what david deutch does is
he will acknowledges the existence of
various other so-called interpretations
and one of the books i have up here
right here is the ghost in the atom
by paul davies and um
john brown julian brown yeah by an
another author and paul davies
and they go through well just about
every interpretation of quantum theory
that existed at the time of the
publication of the book this was back in
the late 80s
one of the people i interview is david
deutsch and in that book
he does try to explain
the many worlds interpretation of
quantum theory what was called the many
worlds interpretation of quantum theory
at that time
and at that time i was still struggling
to understand it and i didn't really
understand
even that explanation but here in the
fabric of reality we get
an explanation of quantum theory that is
just
as clear as one can hopeful
at the time and even through to today it
is still my go-to explanation
for how to understand quantum theory and
there's only one way to understand
quantum theory that we know of
and that is the existence of quasi or
semi-parallel
universes where there are entities
existing those in those other universes
which we
don't have easy access to except for
interference experiments and so on
that's explained in this book and that's
the thing
that really hooked me for sticking with
the book
from beginning to end and being wowed on
almost every other page
but the thing that drew me in that was
the thing that sort of enticed me to
continue reading but the thing that drew
me in
was chapter one chapter one where david
sort of
seemed to dive into my own psychology
somehow
because again this book was published in
and at the time i was doing you know at
uni
undergraduate doing physics doing
mathematics doing philosophy
and kind of having the sense that
there has to be a way in which all of
this comes together i i kind of
somehow subconsciously accepted that
reality was just a
coherent hole out there that you could
come to have
a better and better understanding of
that it didn't have to make
no sense but at the same time everyone
seemed to be
aspiring for specialization so the more
that you knew
the more that you specialized so i was
interested in astronomy but astronomy
wasn't enough you
needed to be an astrophysicist but that
wasn't enough you needed to be an
astrophysicist interested in stars but
that wasn't enough
you need to be an astrophysicist who was
interested in variable stars but that
wasn't enough you needed to be in
astrophysics it was interested in
variable styles called cepheid variables
and you had to use them in order to find
the distance to distant galaxies and so
you would become ever more specialized
as someone who gained more and more
knowledge
this seemed disappointing to me i wanted
to be a more broad than that i wanted to
have a
broad understanding of everything and
that leads me to
the beginning of the book and so i'm
just going to dive in and we'll come
back to what
the other strands of the fabric of
reality are but this is what david says
in chapter one
of the fabric of reality titled the
theory of everything
david writes i remember being told
when i was a small child that in ancient
times it was still possible
for a very learned person to know
everything that was known
i was also told that nowadays so much is
known
that no one could conceivably learn more
than a tiny fraction of it
even in a long lifetime the latter
proposition
surprised and disappointed me in fact i
refused to believe it
i did not know how to justify my
disbelief but i knew that i did not want
things to be like that
and i envied the ancient scholars it was
not that i
wanted to memorize all the facts that
were listed in the world's encyclopedias
on the contrary i hated memorizing facts
that is not the sense in which i
expected it to be possible to know
everything that was known
it would not have disappointed me to be
told that more publications appear
every day than anyone could read in a
lifetime or that there are six hundred
thousand known species of beetle
i had no wish to track the fall of every
sparrow nor did i imagine that
an ancient scholar who supposedly knew
everything that was known
would have known everything of that sort
i had in mind a more discriminating idea
of what should count as being known by
known
i meant understood the idea that one
person might understand
everything that is understood may still
seem fantastic
but it is distinctly less fantastic than
the idea that one person could memorize
every known fact
for example no one could possibly
memorize all known observational data
on even so narrower subject as the
motion of the planets
but many astronomers understand those
motions to the full extent that they
are understood this is possible because
understanding does not depend on knowing
a lot of facts as such
but on having the right concepts
explanations and theories
one comparatively simple and
comprehensible theory
can cover an infinity of digestible
facts
our best theory of planetary motions is
einstein's general theory of relativity
which early in the 20th century
superseded newton's theory of gravity
and motion
it correctly predicts in principle not
only all planetary motions
but all other effects of gravity to the
limits of accuracy of our best
measurements
for a theory to predict something in
principle means that the predictions
follow logically from the theory even if
in practice the amount of computation
that would be needed to generate some of
the predictions
is too large to be technologically
feasible or even too large for it to be
physically possible for us to carry it
out in the universe as we find it
pausing there just my reflection and
going back
to where david talks there about
this idea that knowing everything that
can be known can't possibly be about for
example
knowing where all the
astronomical bodies that orbit the sun
or the stuff in the solar system what
orbits they're going to take
at any particular moment in other words
if you ask me now
where is mars going to be in relation to
the earth
as it orbits the sun tonight at 9 pm as
i look into the sky what part of the sky
will be i won't be able to tell you
i won't know that in fact i won't know
anything except the moon i've got a good
idea where the moon will be tonight
but that's not the kind of knowledge
we're interested in what we're
interested in
is the understanding could i find out
yes
there's a number of ways i could find
out but could i understand the laws
yes yes i've studied those laws and
anyone who wants to study those laws
can study those laws of orbital motion
of
being able to predict given certain
quantities
okay given certain things like the mass
of the sun you know
the distance between the sun and the
object orbiting it okay
these are the kind of bits of
information that can go into the
laws as we understand them to enable a
prediction
and therefore an understanding a deeper
understanding that in fact
all these bodies that go around the sun
follow elliptical orbits
and if you have a sufficiently powerful
computer it will do the calculation for
you you can do it with pen and paper you
can do it with pen and paper
if you want high precision then a
computer is much better as david says
and that's where the understanding is
just understanding that this equation
represents this particular physical
entity be it space-time or in newton's
conception the force of gravity
then given positions of objects and
masses of objects then you can figure
out
what's going to happen to them over time
this is
the understanding that physics gives us
so far from
causing the number of things to be
remembered to proliferate
understanding a simpler deeper law that
underlies all those facts
is far more illuminating and it requires
less memory as well
doesn't it okay back to the book
and and and we're just about to get into
a section where
david is going to depart following papa
from so many of the rest of
physicists as they understand physics
and specifically because and this debate
this debate
uh centers around of course quantum
theory as we will come to
and this is why one of the motivations
for
for why he says what he's about to say
and what he says is quote being able to
predict things
or to describe them however accurately
is not at
all the same thing as understanding them
predictions and descriptions in physics
are often expressed
as mathematical formulae suppose that i
memorized the formula
from which i could if i had the time and
inclination calculate
any planetary position that has been
recorded in the astronomical archives
what exactly have i gained compared with
memorizing those archives directly
the formula is easier to remember but
then
looking a number up in the archives may
be even easier than calculating it from
a formula
the real advantage of the formula is
that it can be used in an infinity of
cases
beyond the archive data for instance to
predict the results of future
observations
it may also yield the historical
positions of the planets more accurately
because the archive data contain
observational errors yet even though the
formula summarises infinitely more facts
than the archives do
knowing it does not amount to
understanding planetary emotions
facts cannot be understood just by being
summarized in a formula
any more than being listed on paper or
committed to memory they can be
understood
only by being explained fortunately
our best theories embody deep
explanations as well as accurate
predictions
for example the general theory of
relativity explains gravity
in terms of a new four-dimensional
geometry of curved space time
it explains precisely how this geometry
affects and is affected by matter
that explanation is the entire content
of the theory predictions about
planetary emotions
are merely some of the consequences we
can deduce
from the explanation now i think that
there
bears repeating speaking about
the general theory of relativity david
said that
explanation is the entire content of the
theory
predictions about planetary motions are
merely some of the consequences
that we can deduce from the explanation
okay so my reflection
on that here in the fabric of reality
david is holding up as brightly
highlighted as
anywhere the centrality of
explanation to the project of science
and even more broadly
but when i first read this book in 1997
i think i appreciated the negative
aspect
of david's argument namely that science
wasn't
only about prediction i think i got that
that science wasn't just a list of facts
i think i got that what i don't think i
really took on board
was what the significance of explanation
really was
and even later when i read some papa for
the first time
i still didn't quite understand the
centrality of explanation
it wasn't until the beginning of
infinity when david
explained for the first time that what
we're after whether it's in science or
anything else is not an explanation of
any kind
because explanations are a dime a dozen
but hard to vary explanations
hard to vary explanations and it's the
hard to vary explanation
that makes an explanation a good
explanation
but i just say that because it's an
interesting personal for me
psychological phenomena that the concept
of explanation was very much
here in the fabric of reality but it
took me
a decade or more to really understand
what was being said here and now i think
i do have a much better understanding of
what was going on there
as much as i took from the fabric of
reality as
fundamentally ground shifting in terms
of the
perspective change that i underwent
having read this book
i still didn't pick up everything and
that's kind of a remarkable
thing and i think this is why people do
go back to
great books and this is what
distinguishes great books from
lesser works let's say that you can keep
returning to
these books and figuring out that
there's yet more to learn
and that you missed so much the first
time around and like i say
the importance of explanation here that
david is highlighting
seemed to have escaped me it really did
escape me to a
to a large extent i understood what
scientific theories were not
but i don't think i really got what
scientific theories
were and i'd been reading about you know
science and
studying philosophy um all this time
you know all the way up to the beginning
of infinity uh so i think it wasn't
until actually
even just slightly prior to the
beginning of infinity it was in one of
david's
ted talks the a new way to explain
explanation i think it was then
that the light bulb moment happened for
me the first time i saw that
but i guess i shouldn't be too hard on
myself
after all there are professional
scientists out there greatly
accomplished physicists
that i do not think appreciate what
a good explanation is or the importance
of explanation at all
well we know this is the case because as
we're going to come to in the fabric of
reality
as we've covered somewhat in the
beginning infinity series well we've
covered a lot in the beginning of
infinity series
there is a certain kind of theoretical
physicist and it seems to infect
theoretical physics more than anything
else
a certain type of theoretical physicist
specifically interested in
let's say quantum theory that thinks
that
explanation is overrated and what we're
after of course is
prediction and merely prediction this is
the error of what's called
instrumentalism that all you want out of
a theory
is to be able to predict the outcome of
experiments
and this is a completely misconceived
notion as to what science is about
i mean no one would be tempted in almost
any other area of science
to think that this is what science is
about no biologist is interested in
trying to predict
which species are going to evolve
they're interested in
understanding the explanation of the
origin of
extant species and even extinct species
as well
in chemistry we're interested in the the
the explanation
of combustion not all the ways in which
fires might occur in the future we're
not trying to predict
all the fires that are going to happen
in geology we're interested in
understanding unifying things like
volcanic eruptions
earthquakes the drift of continents and
although we'd like to be able to predict
things like earthquakes we we can't at
the moment that's not the whole point of
geology
geology is understanding the differences
between rock how rocks come to have the
different
chemistry that they have within them the
age of the earth how a planet can be
dynamic or not we want to understand
which is to say
we want to explain uh but but it is just
in certain rarefied areas
of theoretical physics that apparently
the rules need to change because some
people are uncomfortable
with literal explanations or they simply
lack an explanation
so beware beware that kind
of physicist because it seems to be in
physics alone where explanation is
pushed aside
but i shouldn't say only okay of course
of course we have a certain kind of
scientism that's out there now as well
so there is a
lack of willingness to understand let's
say
how economic systems work or
how psychology works and instead were
engaged rather too much of the time in
attempting to predict
the behavior of people the behaviour of
economic markets
rather than understanding what it takes
in order to
let's say create wealth in economics
what are the preconditions for
creating wealth what has worked in the
past and why has it
worked in the past can we rule out some
economic theories
instead some people just want to plot
graphs in an attempt
to predict what is going to cause the
stock market to rise or not and then
fiddle with the knobs in some way or
other
and this is an instrumentalist view i
would suggest within
within economics and of course we have
historicism this idea this
false idea this dangerously false idea
that by looking at the past
we can extrapolate through to the future
especially in
the realm of politics and history and
sociology
and this leads to some terrible
political movements so
i'm probably a little bit unfair to say
that it's only the theoretical
physicists to do this yes it appears in
psychology and history and humanities
and social sciences it does
appear there as well this reluctance to
really grapple with
and understanding of things and being a
certain
degree humble in the face of not having
an answer
of being able to say we don't know we
are ignorant here
but let's do the best with what we do in
fact know
but not pretend that we have already
everything tied up into a nice neat
little bundle
where we can extrapolate off into the
future
because the risk of course with
extrapolation is it is an application of
the false mode of reasoning which is
induction and there is absolutely no way
that you can rule out
the next observation that you make isn't
going to refute your entire
linear trend or whatever trend you think
that you have in hand
instead as we say here and as david is
explaining here the only way
the only way to make predictions
reliable predictions predictions which
are genuinely
logical deductions and which allow you
to assume
that what you know now will happen into
the future is to have a
good hard to very explanation of course
good and hard to ferry do not yet appear
here in the fabric of reality
but the idea of a prediction is we're
deducing it from an explanation
and and more than that it has to be a
good explanation
and and specifically the system has to
behave in such a way that you know
that it has universal laws governing it
such that the extrapolation
is not going to be affected by things
like for example knowledge creation
yet and so this is why general
relativity allows us to predict the
motion of planets
why because we can reasonably at this
point in
the history of human civilization assume
that the only thing affecting for
example the emotion of planets
in our solar system around the sun is
the curvature of space time is gravity
explained by the general theory of
relativity and therefore
we can make a deduction from that theory
which we call a prediction
and predict where any of the bodies
within the solar system are going to be
from moment to moment using general
relativity now
can we make a prediction a reliable
prediction for what
those planets are going to be doing a
billion years from now no
no for a whole bunch of reasons because
we cannot assume
in the trivial case that some other
large cosmological body isn't going to
cause a collision with the objects
within our solar system so that's a
simple thing our ignorance about
what else might happen to the solar
system into the distant future
a comet could come a a stray neutron
star could go wandering through the
solar system who knows
but more the more optimistic view is as
we learn from the beginning of infinity
we don't know what human civilization is
going to be like
a billion years from now a billion years
will we have the power to move planets
out of there all but
we want to do so perhaps perhaps we will
have
mined mars such that it no longer exists
basically and we've converted it
entirely into a
super colony that travels across
galaxies
i don't know but the point is we can't
just
solely rely upon something like general
relativity to predict
the orbital motion of planets into the
far far distant future
we can do it for the next few years
[Laughter]
reasonably
with some reasonable accuracy we would
presume rupert jim
okay let's go back to the book david
writes
what makes the general theory of
relativity so important
is not that it can predict planetary
emotions a shade more accurately than
newton's theory can
but that it reveals and explains
previously unsuspected aspects of
reality
such as the curvature of space and time
this is typical of scientific
explanation
scientific theories explain the objects
and phenomena of our experience in terms
of an underlying reality which we do not
experience directly
but the ability of a theory to explain
what we experience
is not its most valuable attribute its
most valuable attribute is that it
explains the fabric of reality itself
as we shall see one of the most valuable
significant and also useful attributes
of human thought generally
is its ability to reveal and explain the
fabric of reality
pausing there just emphasizing that so
here
in the fabric of reality we already have
a hint of
the importance of people and the
importance of human thoughts there
one of the most valuable significant and
also useful attributes of human thought
generally
is its ability to reveal and explain
fantastic so there we go are we getting
the nascent beginnings of the
universality of
the human mind i think so i think so i
think the hints are there the
the ground is being set and there also
where david writes the underlying
reality which we do not experience
directly is the first
shot across the bow of empiricism
okay this great misconception that so
many scientists and philosophers and
i guess men on the street still holds
that the way in which science works is
that we go out and we observe stuff
and in observing stuff we derive
knowledge from
nature in some way this is a a
misconceived way
of thinking about the project of science
or knowledge generally
this is not the way in which knowledge
is constructed
it's a creative endeavor so let's
continue with the book david writes
yet some philosophers and even some
scientists disparage the role of
explanation in science to them the basic
purpose of a scientific theory is not to
explain anything
but to predict the outcome of
experiments its entire content
lies in its predictive formulae they
consider that any consistent explanation
that a theory may give for its
predictions
is as good as any other or as good as no
explanation at all
so long as the predictions are true this
view is called
instrumentalism because it says that a
theory is no more than
an instrument for making predictions to
instrumentalists
the idea that science can enable us to
understand the underlying reality that
accounts for our observations
is a fallacy and a conceit they do not
see how anything a scientific theory may
say beyond predicting the outcomes of
experiments
can be more than empty words
explanations in particular
they regard as mere psychological props
a sort of fiction which we incorporate
in theories to make them more easily
remembered and entertaining
the nobel prize-winning physicist
stephen weinberg was in an
instrumentalist mood when he made the
following extraordinary comment
about einstein's explanation of gravity
quote from weinberg quote
the important thing is to be able to
make predictions about images on the
astronomers photographic plates
frequencies of spectral lines and so on
and it simply doesn't matter whether we
ascribe these predictions to the
physical effects of gravitational fields
on the motion of planets and photons as
in pre-einsteinian physics
or to a curvature of space and time
gravitational cosmology page 147 end
quote
weinberg and the other instrumentalist
mistaken what we ascribe the images on
astronomers photographic plates to does
matter and it matters not only to
theoretical physicists like myself
whose very motivation for formulating
and studying theories is the desire to
understand the world better
i am sure that this is weinberg's
motivation too he is not really driven
by an urge to predict images and spectra
for even in purely practical
applications the explanatory power
of a theory is paramount and its
predictive power only supplementary
if this seems surprising imagine that an
extraterrestrial scientist has visited
the earth
and given us an ultra high technology
oracle which can predict the outcome of
any possible experiment
but provides no explanations according
to instrumentalists
once we had that oracle we should have
no further use for scientific theories
except as a means of entertaining
ourselves but is that true
how would the oracle be used in practice
in some sense it would contain the
knowledge necessary to build
say an interstellar spaceship but how
exactly would that help us to build one
or to build another oracle of the same
kind or even a better mousetrap
the oracle only predicts the outcomes of
experiments therefore in order to use it
at all
we must first know what experiments to
ask it about
if we gave it the design of a spaceship
and the details of a proposed test
flight
it could tell us how the spaceship would
perform on such a flight
but it could not design the spaceship
for us in the first place
and even if it predicted that the
spaceship we had designed would explode
and take off
it could not tell us how to prevent such
an explosion
that would still be for us to work out
and before we could work it out
before we could even begin to improve
the design in any way we should have to
understand among other things
how the spaceship was supposed to work
only then would we have
any chance of discovering what might
cause an explosion on takeoff
prediction even perfect universal
prediction is simply no substitute
for explanation pause there my
reflection
so all of this unfortunately
unfortunately
in my view i don't know i can't speak
for david
but it seems to all arise from the same
place
it came from quantum theory it came from
the beginnings of quantum theory where
physicists rightly
were confused befuddled they didn't know
what was going on
there's a whole swag of observations
they were making that just
didn't comport with what they already
knew about physics
there were mysteries and
some of them simply retreated from
reason
they said well the project is hopeless
we're very very good at being able to
predict the outcome of experiments so
that's all we can do
that's what science is about which is i
would say
less arrogant and more ignorant about
science than anything else
it's as if to say the entirety of
science
is theoretical physics and more than
that
the entirety of science is those
problems
that you are unable to find answers to
solutions to
explanations for and so therefore from
this
observation from your failure from your
failure as a theoretical physicist
in trying to understand this stuff and
you should be failing all the time
that's the whole point of science you're
failing you're encountering problems
and then trying to overcome them but
because of this failure this specific
failure this
this failure in certain uh rather at
that time esoteric areas of physics
you're going to extrapolate out to the
rest of the entirety of
science as if all of science is just
about predicting the outcome of
experiments
it doesn't make much sense it doesn't
seem fair
it lacks consideration for all the other
interesting areas of science where we
really
do want to understand what the heck is
going on
we in people interested in astronomy and
astrophysics
we love the explanation it's a thrilling
explanation
about the evolution of stars stars like
the sun
and stars unlike the sun and yes
those theories those explanations allow
us to
give very rough predictions
about what might happen to the sun in
the future okay absent people of course
and we presume that what's going to
happen to the sun in the future is it's
going to
end its life as a firstly a red giant
and then a white dwarf star which will
just slowly cool
over billions of years we know this
that's a fascinating explanation
especially in light of the fact of what
else could have happened to the sun if
it had been larger
namely if it had been a much bigger star
many times more massive let's say 10
times more massive then it would explode
at the end of its life
leaving behind either a neutron star or
possibly a black hole if it's bigger
still
that explanation is the point of
astronomy and astrophysics this is why
people do
those kind of subjects the the the the
fact that we can just collect
light in telescopes and come to an
understanding of the universe like that
and understanding in the universe
is phenomenal that's the exciting part
about science not predicting
what's going to happen to any given star
it's the general explanation
the big bang cosmology you know
cosmology still
as a science is very much in its infancy
it's only been over the last few decades
we've been able to
actually gather data data to some extent
about the behavior of the universe as a
whole
prior to that cosmology was well within
the remit of theology only
to deal with it was metaphysical how
could we
human beings pathetic as we are presume
to try and
understand something like the entire
universe
the entire physical universe and yet
this is what
cosmologists take on and by gathering
these scant amounts of evidence
it's not like the most crucial part of
cosmology
is about predicting what's going to
happen to the universe in the future
that's part of it
but the only way in which we can make
any kind of guess about what's going to
happen into the future a scientific
guess a scientific
prediction uh conjecture about the
possibility of what will happen into the
distant future
is by having an explanation in the first
place that relies on our understanding
of what's causing the evidence that we
gather
evidence like the 2.3 kelvin or the 2.7
kelvin temperature of the cosmic
microwave background the heat left over
after the big bang which we've only
recently be able to collect
you know these photons these these very
low energy photons
and wonder about the origins of them and
explain therefore the origins of them
and so that that's all the fun stuff
putting together all the
all the different we're triangulating
really with with this
this heat that permeates through out the
entire universe along with the fact that
wherever you point your telescope at
very distant galaxies you find they're
moving away not only from us but from
each other and and trying to understand
why
is the amount of hydrogen out there in
intergalactic space
this amount compared to the amount of
helium that's in intergalactic space
compared to
everything else that's out there as well
why is it this ratio
this this triangulation of evidence that
that that enables us to then come up
with the grand explanation that we call
the big bang
and and then an inflationary theory is
phenomenal it's that that's the
phenomenal part and the exciting part of
the story of science
not predicting and anyway predicting
these really distant things in cosmology
it's
kind of again we're still in the infancy
and so whenever you hear hear you know
you hear
science popularizes it's kind of fun i
think it's about as fun as
uh a science fiction movie at this point
there are you know the predictions about
what's going to happen to the universe
on time scales of
hundreds of millions billions even
trillions of years some of these
predictions
will make them very very confidently but
the the
the evidence is is limited that would be
the first thing and the time scales that
we're talking about are just so
ridiculous
that it it would seem to me that it's
going to be the case that we're going to
find
far better um cosmological theories
so at the moment of course we think that
you know the universe is undergoing
this dark energy accelerating expansion
and if we take that
seriously through to the absolute limits
of what we could
possibly know then we think well
eventually all the galaxies that that we
can observe are going to wink out of
existence because they're going to
they're going to be accelerated along
with space-time beyond
the horizon of what we can see
eventually only our galaxy will be left
like a lonely island and then it will
start to
expand itself as space begins to expand
and then you know even the solar system
will expand and then you know
the planet will expand probably by this
time by the way of course the
the sun has long since extinguished
itself but if any people are left here
uh in the region that is the solar
system even eventually they will start
to expand as well their bodies will
start to expand apart
because of this accelerating expansion
of space-time
but this is all predicated on the fact
that our
theory our present theory the the best
theory that we currently have about the
behavior of
the universe won't be overturned and
i would if i was a betting person
i would think that that that observation
is going to be overturned in some way
in some significant way uh and and one
possible
way is that you know even thousands of
years from now
even if that explanation hasn't been
overturned
that people might be able to harness the
energy in some way
and reverse it because at the moment
that that accelerating expansion is
actually quite a weak
quite a weak force and that gets us very
far away
from uh the book here except to say
it's clearly not the case that science
in any field at all
is primarily about prediction it's about
understanding
physical reality and reality more
broadly and therefore it's about
explanations so even even an oracle
that's able to
make all the predictions in the world
doesn't allow you to really understand
the world that you're in even if you can
predict the outcome of experiments
as david goes on to write the oracle
would be very useful in many situations
but its usefulness would always depend
on
people's ability to solve scientific
problems
in just the way they have to now namely
by devising
explanatory theories it would not even
replace all experimentation because its
ability to predict the outcome of a
particular experiment would in practice
depend on how easy it was to describe
the experiment accurately enough
for the oracle to give a useful answer
compared with doing the experiment in
reality
after all the oracle would have to have
some sort of user interface
perhaps a description of the experiment
would have to be entered into it in some
standard language
in that language some experiments would
be harder to specify than others
in practice for many experiments the
specification would be too complex to be
entered
thus the oracle would have the same
general advantages and disadvantages
as any other source of experimental data
and it will be useful only in cases
where consulting it happens to be more
convenient than using
other sources to put that another way
there is already one such oracle out
there
namely the physical world it tells us
the result of any possible experiment if
we ask it in the right language
i if we do the experiment though in some
cases it is impractical for us to enter
a description of the experiment in the
required form
ie to build and operate the apparatus
but it provides no explanations
end quote isn't that fantastic
very much in david deutsch fashion just
eviscerating
uh what might be regarded as a
knock-down argument against people who
are saying that
science is about uh predictions
yeah so if you so if you had you know
it's almost like the the super ai
okay not agi but a super ai okay
narrow intelligence but it's a super
intelligence
and this super intelligence can predict
the outcome of any experiment that you
like
and so this is what you know some of the
early quantum physicists were about some
quantum physics still today
uh talk about being instrumentalists or
the shut up and calculate
type people and if this is all
that science is about then this oracle
would make
wouldn't it science redundant
but the problem is if you wanted to
predict the outcome of experiment
then you have to first specify the
experiment that takes a heck of a lot of
explanatory work to do
after all why are you doing this
experiment in the first place
what is the theory that you're testing
have we thought about that yet how do we
input this in how do we tell the oracle
what the experiment is precisely
what is the instrumentation that you're
using how did you figure out what that
instrumentation was what is the
problem that the instrumentation is
trying to solve in the first place
and as david says here we've got this
article don't we we've got this oracle
it's called physical reality okay
physical reality is the oracle it will
give you the answer to any experiment
that you ask it
the hard part is not asking the question
the hard part is figuring out
what the question is in the first place
asking
what you're testing what what exactly is
this theory you're testing why are you
doing this experiment
this is not what science is about okay
we learn these terrible lessons in
school science class that that that what
an experiment is
is oh well we're doing an experiment
today class
we're going to take a a a test tube of
these chemicals and a test tube of these
chemicals and we're going to mix them
together into a beaker and see what
happens that's an experiment isn't it
and in fact this enters the this enters
culture
this is what experiments are supposed to
be just a a random
mixing of ideas trying something where
you've got absolutely no idea
why you're doing it why you're doing it
in the first place
let alone what is going to happen and
having found something new
happening something unexpected which of
course will happen in any case you just
don't know what's going to happen you
take your two test tubes you mix them
together
if nothing happens that's surprising you
didn't know that that's what was going
to happen
if you get an explosion that's
surprising you didn't know that was
going to happen if you get a color
change and whatever the color is it's
going to be surprising
but the point is you had no theory to
begin with
did you what were you testing why are
you doing this experiment this is not
what an experiment is
i wouldn't call that an experiment there
is no sense in which that's an
experiment
an experiment is a test of a theory and
there are two kinds of experiments in
the world
there's an experiment where you
literally have two
good theories on offer and you don't
know which one is true
it's almost impossible to think of cases
in science where
there were three reasonable viable
explanations for a given phenomena
it doesn't happen in science just think
about it yourself
the usually is identically one
explanation
and we call it the scientific theory of
for so long as far as the
the origins of the universe went uh
something that
many people were interested in there
really were no viable explanations at
all
there were supernatural ones okay god
did it
which kind of raises the question as to
where did god come from and if people
answer well
god is that entity that's outside of
space and time and whatever else well
why move the problem one step back why
not just say well the origin of the
universe whatever that thing was
is outside of space and time and gave
origin to the universe
we don't need a an intelligent creator
being whatever the case
there were not really any good
scientific explanations you know at the
turn of the
1900s the turn of the 20th century you
know we had
had this idea of an eternal universe
that was just always there or infinite
in all spatial
directions you know maybe god clicked
his fingers
and a universe that was spatially
infinite just popped into existence at
some point you know whatever the bible
said however however long
six thousand years or something but but
this this makes no testable
scientific predictions there's no
experiment that we can do to to test
whether or not that that is a better
theory than something else not
observation that we can make
an experiment has to be able to compare
two different competing scientific
theories and eventually we did have
two eventually we did we had the idea of
the big bang you know the big bang sort
of uh well
it's an interesting part of the history
of cosmologists uh
who came up with the big bang you know
was it the the priest george lumatra
was it alexander friedman or was it
einstein as well they all had seemingly
had
had something to do with coming up with
the big bang i don't know where you
would actually
uh place the credit for the big bang
itself it was just a
this really was a case of the slow
accumulation of
problems and evidence in cosmology which
then all pointed to
uh this common origin in in the space
and time the
the universe was smaller in the past but
there was there was a time where
it was quite reasonable to subscribe to
fred hoyle's idea
of a steady state universe of a universe
that just perpetually existed
so there was there was a genuine split
in the scientific community was it
an origin in space and time the big bang
or was it a universe that had always
been there the steady state
and and the purpose of an experiment a
cosmological experiment of a kind
of being able to observe observe things
like
the cosmic microwave background that
constitutes an experiment setting up a
big
antenna that can collect microwave
radiation and to notice
it is homogeneous in all directions more
or less
which means that the universe is
permeated with heat what was the origin
of the heat well the steady state can't
really account for that
nor can steady state of course properly
account
for the redshift of distant galaxies in
all directions as well
and then the ratio of hydrogen to helium
okay all of this stuff is explained by
the big bang theory and not explained by
adequately by
the steady state theory and so these
things these observations constitute
experiments of a kind that rule out one
particular
theory in favor of another now this is
the ideal
kind of experiment the ideal kind of
experiment is called a crucial
experiment it decides between
two competing theories now the the only
other the only other kind of experiment
is an experiment that
makes the theory problematic and maybe
doesn't even make the theory problematic
it's just
a problem you know the the measurement
of the speed of
neutrinos back in the day whenever that
was when the large hadron collider was
was switched on and they thought that
the neutrinos were traveling faster than
the speed of light this is an experiment
they did this experiment
that experiment was problematic in the
true sense of the word not the woke
sense of the word
in the true sense of the word it raised
a problem
now did it raise a problem for
relativity well it might have
it might have as it turned out no it was
problematic for another reason namely
the experiment itself
was faulty flawed it suffered from
something called systematic error
okay there was a there was an error in
the method the way in which the
experiment was conducted a
cable was loose or something or other
and so this is a
legitimate experiment in a sense it
revealed something about
the nature of experimentation of that
kind okay careful with your cables
but that's the only other kind of
experiment where you already have a
theory you have a theory about
neutrinos and the speed with which
things can move
and the way in which an experimental
apparatus should be set up okay
and you're testing all of this stuff
you're testing this by conducting the
actual experiment
collecting the data but my example of
you know
the random mixing of chemicals in
a school science laboratory when you
have no clue what's going on
well that's not really an experiment now
to be fair i don't think any science
teacher actually
really does this okay most science
teachers
have some conception at least of
what's going on with the underlying
chemistry or science
and they do try and explain this to the
children and the children
are you know testing things they are
testing hypotheses this
this does indeed go on but the extent to
which you're
really getting a genuine understanding
of what's going on is
anyone's guess that's a whole other
topic however
okay so i'm going to go back to the book
i'm going to skip a section there which
is
more detail about instrumentalism this
idea that
the entire purpose of science is just
about making predictions
and i'll skip to the point where david
writes quote
an extreme form of instrumentalism
called positivism
or logical positivism holds that all
statements other than those describing
or predicting observations
are not only superfluous but meaningless
although this doctrine is itself
meaningless according to its own
criterion
it was nevertheless the prevailing
theory of scientific knowledge
during the first half of the 20th
century even today
instrumentalist and positivist ideas
still have currency
one reason why they are superficially
plausible is that
although prediction is not the purpose
of science it is part of the
characteristic
method of science the scientific method
involves postulating a new theory to
explain some class of phenomena
and then performing a crucial
experimental test
an experiment for which the old theory
predicts one observable outcome
and the new theory another one then
rejects the theory whose predictions
turn out to be false
thus the outcome of a crucial
experimental test to decide between two
theories
does depend on the theory's predictions
and not directly on their explanations
this is the source of the misconception
that there is nothing more to a
scientific theory than its predictions
but experimental testing
is by no means the only process involved
in the growth of scientific knowledge
the overwhelming majority of theories
are rejected
because they contain bad explanations
not because they fail experimental tests
we reject them without ever bothering to
test them pausing there
my reflection wow there's just so much
there and i think this is again
why or a possible explanation for myself
possible explanation for myself as to
why i didn't get it the first time
around even though i read this book
you know over and again and i was
engaged even in you know the late 90s
in online email discussions about the
book i still failed
to to take on board so much you know
there's the concept of a
crucial experimental test this took me
all the way until
well 2016 2016 when david
published his paper the logic of
experimental tests
particularly of everetti and quantum
theory and it was then
that i think i finally appreciated what
a crucial
experimental test was so there's a
difference between a crucial
experimental test
and any other kind of experiment that
happens in science and again the crucial
experimental test
is the one which is able to decide
between
a theory and its rivals and so it leaves
one theory standing ruling out
the others and in most cases
certainly in physics at best you've got
two
competing theories at best usually you
only have one
and if you do have one and you're
testing that theory by doing experiments
and the experiments aren't agreeing with
the theory then you've got this problem
in preparing epistemology uh sometimes
known as a jupiter
thesis of of how do you know what's
wrong do you is it the theory that's
wrong
when it disagrees with the experiment or
is it that your experiment is wrong you
know there's that saying
many a beautiful theory has been slain
by an ugly fact well it's not quite true
you can't slay a theory with an ugly
fact unless you've got another theory to
jump to unless you have a
better idea of what to do if we did
10 experiments tomorrow and they all
disagreed with general relativity
there's literally nothing
for it but to rely on general relativity
because no one's got a better theory of
general relativity
near better than general relativity
namely
a theory that can do everything that
general relativity can do
and more and more is the key thing
and there at the end of this section
here we get
the idea that the overwhelming majority
of theories are ejected because they
contain bad explanations
now now this part i got back in the
fabric of reality and this is one of
those
thrilling passages because
here we get to the grass
cure for the common cold this is the
first time i encountered that
argument this this idea
that you need an explanation it's the
explanation that you're testing
not the predictions let's just read it
okay and this is where i'll end today
because i think it's a great way to end
things and if you haven't heard this
before
strap yourself in okay the importance of
explanations
in testing in experimental testing
rather than just predictions
david writes for example consider the
theory that eating a kilogram of grass
is a cure for the common cold
that theory makes experimentally
testable predictions
if people tried the grass cure and found
it ineffective
the theory would be proved false but it
has never been tested and probably never
will be
because it contains no explanation
either of how the cure would work
or of anything else we rightly presume
it to be false
there are always infinitely many
possible theories of that sort
compatible with existing observations
and making new predictions so we could
never have the time or resources to test
them at all
what we test our new theories that seem
to show promise of explaining things
better
than the prevailing ones do pausing
there
ending it for today but just notice
anyone can come along and make a
testable
prediction a testable claim that doesn't
mean they've got a scientific
explanation it doesn't mean they're
doing science at all
david's other example is you know any
person with a sandwich board standing on
the street corner saying that the
world is going to come to an end in
fiery bombardment from the heavens
next tuesday june the 18th or whatever
um has a testable prediction okay
and when the day comes and goes without
incident
does anyone learn anything well they
might or they might not they might just
go back to their religious
text reinterpret it in some way and say
oh i was out by a year just you wait
until next year
but there is no explanation there it's
testable
but without the explanation we have no
reason to assume
why that prediction should be the way
that it is so if
if you say grass is going to cure the
common cold
or eating one kilo of grass is going to
cure the common cold
why should we believe you what is the
mechanism
and so this works for any area of
science
and especially any area of pseudoscience
okay any
any quackery anyone who has the
crazy nostrum the the claim about what
uh alternative medical intervention is
going to
cure you with your disease the key thing
is to ask
why and how now it's absolutely the case
there are still
places within medicine where there isn't
a fantastic
explanation of why the
particular thing works but in
traditional
western medicine certainly at least what
we have
is a tradition of rules of thumb in
other words
this thing has been shown to work
in many cases and we don't know why we
don't know why
yet but we're working on it we're trying
to figure out what the explanation
is okay and and and i can easily and we
can
you know the community of doctors can
can show that the thing causes
little harm and has some benefit
for reasons they don't know but this is
because the gradual evolution
the the hard-won evolution of that kind
of knowledge
which we might even call inexplicit
medical knowledge
that's been passed down even if we don't
have a fully explicit
scientific explanation of how some of
these treatments work
okay so this is the first
of what i presume will be many episodes
about the fabric of reality
we're barely through chapter one yet and
so
next time i think i will read more
speak less but until then bye-bye
now of course many people may well
notice that if you're watching this for
the first time i have another series on
the beginning of infinity
and importantly alongside this i have a
series on
the science of canon cart chiara
maletto's
new book that has only been released
over the last
few weeks this is in 2021 and so i'd
encourage people to
go out and get that book as well as of
course the fabric of reality
and if you're so inclined you can find
me on patreon you can do a google search
for topcast patreon
c a s t-o-k-c-a-s-t patreon and you'll
find me there or brett
r hall at patreon as well um or you can
just go to
www.bretthall.org and on the front there
there's a little button that says donate
and i would appreciate
any kind of assistance with my ongoing
work here in understanding the world
view
of david deutsch karl popper
kiara maletto and various other people
who are interested
in the optimistic future and the
centrality of people
to understanding the universe their
cosmological significance
until next time bye-bye
[Music]
[Applause]
you